we are joined Now by Mark Owen Jones
associate professor of Middle East
studies at hammad bin Khalifa University
thank you very much for your time this
morning is it unusual for a US president
to begin and really focus on foreign
policy in a State of the Union Address I
mean I don't think it's it is unusual I
don't think it's unusual considering the
situation we're in now which is an
ongoing genocide in Gaza perpetrated by
one of the US's closest allies
perpetrated by an ally that has
historically played a very important
role in lobbying in the US and and
whether you're Republican or Democrat uh
trying to secure you know the APAC vote
the Israel lobbies vote is important so
I think Biden uh in particular knowing
as well that Trump is incredibly
pro-israel and his his Contender is is
making sure that he puts that front and
center not least because obviously the
US want to demonstrate their commitment
to Israel but also Biden is also aware
that there is this backlash a growing
backlash against the US's support for
Israel yeah and yet despite
beginning his State of the Union Address
by talking about foreign policy and you
know you mentioned the genocide in Gaza
that's not what he began the address he
he actually started talking about Russia
and Ukraine when he did get to the point
about what's happening in Gaza he
mentions building a temporary port on
gaza's Coast to allow more Aiden why is
he making such an announcement when
there are many trucks waiting at gaza's
borders that Israel is impeding well
it's a it's a it's a it's a very um I
say bizarre State of Affairs but it's in
a state of affairs that's hardly
surprising now given what's happened
over the past couple of weeks right
Israel have refused uh and they've
hindered the supply of Aid across the
border the most efficient form of
delivering Aid through trucks across
Rafa this is part of their war on unra
um and as a result we've seen us and
some of its allies airdropping Aid into
Gaza which is both inefficient and
expensive and also it's a huge publicity
stand it's designed to be a spectacle
that attempts demonstrate that the US
are trying their best to try and remedy
this humanitarian crisis in in Gaza uh
and and fundamentally it's about the
fact that the US are un I would say
unable I to to an extent unable to
pressure Israel into uh allowing Aid I
say unable but there's an element of an
unwilling too and I when I say element
of unwilling this goes back to the
initial point I was saying about the US
Biden Democrats and Republicans Al light
are concerned about Israel uh Israel's
support right and so if Biden is seen to
be too harsh on Israel even if he feels
that he's aware that he has a contender
very you know popular Contender who
might use you know Biden's perceived
weakness uh in in maybe you know
supporting Israel as as as a form of
votes is he trying to get here because
the majority of Democrats support a
ceasefire in Gaza but the majority of
Democrats and the majority of people in
many countries who support Israel
support the ceasefire and I think the
case of whether it's the base is not
necessarily relevant here because we
know that us politics is so profoundly
based on the power of lobbying so I
think that's a really important
consideration we can't just talk about
how the the the popular demands of the
people is actually reflected in not just
us politics but I would say Democratic
politics across Europe because it's not
so are you saying then that the lobbies
right now in America are more powerful
than the people and what the people want
I would say lobbying is incredibly
important and big money whether through
lobbies or other forms or super packs in
US politics are really important
defining policy but particularly foreign
policy yeah we've got the CIA chief
who's in DOA today after being in Egypt
yesterday and this is being seen as a
last ditch attempt for a ceasefire just
finally how do you assess the prospects
I mean of him getting anywhere well I
think it's a I think it's a sign of of
the the urgency that people feel about
securing a ceasefire deal before Ramadan
um but I I don't I think it's hard for
us to fundamentally know we've had Hamas
accus Netanyahu walking away we've had
Israel also accuse Hamas of sabotaging
the ceas fire this is normal politics
this kind of sherad that we're seeing
doesn't naturally suggest that there
won't be a cease file before Ramadan but
I think as Israel continue to hinder Aid
and these kind of desperate attempts to
to to have this kind of Port
establishing Gaza reflect a level of
exasperation and Desperation that
suggests that we might be quite far from
having ceas for security Marco and Jones
thank you so much for your analysis we
appreciate it